Thanos integration (#1496)
kubermatic/docs: content/kubermatic/main/tutorials-howtos/monitoring-logging-alerting/master-seed/customization/thanos.md

+++
linkTitle = "Thanos"
title = "Thanos integration with prometheus"
date = 2023-07-20T09:44:15+05:30
weight = 20
+++

> This page explains how we can integrated [Thanos](https://thanos.io/) long term storage of metrics with KKP seed prometheus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page explains how we can integrate [Thanos](https://thanos.io/) long term storage of metrics with KKP seed Prometheus
```

## Pre-requsites
1. Helm is installed.
1. KKP v2.22.4+ is installed in the cluster.

> 1. KKP prometheus chart has been deployed in each seed where you want to store long term metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. KKP Prometheus chart has been deployed in each seed where you want to store long term metrics
```

## Integration steps
Below page outlines

> 1. Install thanos components in your kubernetes cluster via Helm chart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Installation of Thanos components in your Kubernetes cluster via Helm chart
```

> 1. Customize KKP prometheus chart to augment prometheus pod with thanos sidecar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Customization of KKP Prometheus chart to augment Prometheus pod with Thanos sidecar
```

> 2. Customize KKP prometheus chart values to monitor and get alerts for Thanos components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Customization of KKP Prometheus chart values to monitor get alerts for Thanos components
```

Author: I would say.. the `and` should be kept.. so my proposal would be
```
2. Customization of KKP Prometheus chart values to monitor and get alerts for Thanos components
```

Author: Check latest push.

## Install thanos chart

> You can install thanos helm chart from bitnami chart repository 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can install the Thanos Helm chart from Bitnami chart repository 
```

```shell
HELM_EXPERIMENTAL_OCI=1 helm upgrade --install thanos \
  --namespace monitoring --create-namespace\
   --version 12.8.6 \
  -f thanos-values.yaml \
  oci://registry-1.docker.io/bitnamicharts/thanos 
```

### Basic Thanos Customization file 

> You can configure Thanos to store the metrics in any s3 compatible storage as well as other popular cloud storate solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure Thanos to store the metrics in any s3 compatible storage as well as many other popular cloud storage solutions.
```

Below yaml snippet uses Azure Blob storage configuration. You can refer to all [supported object storage configurations](https://thanos.io/tip/thanos/storage.md/#supported-clients).

```yaml
# thanos-values.yaml
# Refer https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/bitnami/thanos for more configuration options
objstoreConfig: |-
  type: AZURE
  config:
    storage_account: "<AZ_STORAGE_ACCT>"
    storage_account_key: "<AZ_STORAGE_ACCT_KEY>"
    container: "<AZ blob container name>"
    max_retries: 0
compactor:
  enabled: true
  persistence:
    enabled: true
    # size: 80Gi
  retentionResolutionRaw: 2d
  retentionResolution5m: 2w
  retentionResolution1h: 60d
metrics:
  enabled: true
storegateway:
  enabled: true
```

## Augment prometheus to use Thanos sidecar

> In order to receive metrics from prometheus into Thanos, Thanos provides two mechanisms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to receive metrics from Prometheus into Thanos, Thanos provides two mechanisms.
```

1. [Thanos Sidecar](https://thanos.io/tip/components/sidecar.md/)
1. [Thanos Receiver](https://thanos.io/tip/components/receive.md/)

> Thanos sidecar is a much simpler and less resource heavy approach. You can understand more about Thanos components [here](https://thanos.io/tip/thanos/quick-tutorial.md/#components). Due to simplicity, we have outlined how to integrate the Thanos sidecar in existing prometheus chart configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanos sidecar is a much simpler and less resource heavy approach. You can laern more about Thanos components [here](https://thanos.io/tip/thanos/quick-tutorial.md/#components). Due to simplicity, we have outlined how to integrate the Thanos sidecar in the existing Prometheus chart configuration.
```

Author: Your suggestion had spelling mistake... so... I think I will fix it via manual commit.

Author: Check latest push.

> Use below changes in `prometheus` block in `values.yaml` to add Thanos sidecar into existing prometheus pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use below changes in `prometheus` block in `values.yaml` to add Thanos sidecar into existing Prometheus pods.
```

      # Do not turn on thanos reloader since default prometheus already includes configmap-reloader
      # - --reloader.config-file=/etc/prometheus/config/prometheus.yaml
      # - --reloader.config-envsubst-file=/etc/prometheus-shared/prometheus.yaml
      env:
      - name: POD_NAME
        valueFrom:
          fieldRef:
            fieldPath: metadata.name
      image: quay.io/thanos/thanos:v0.31.0
      livenessProbe:
        httpGet:
          path: /-/healthy
          port: http-sidecar
      ports:
      - name: http-sidecar
        containerPort: 10902
      - name: grpc
        containerPort: 10901
      readinessProbe:
        httpGet:
          path: /-/ready
          port: http-sidecar
      resources:
        limits:
          cpu: 300m
          memory: 2Gi
        requests:
          cpu: 100m
          memory: 32Mi
      volumeMounts:
      - name: db
        mountPath: /prometheus
        readOnly: false
        subPath: prometheus-db
      - name: config
        mountPath: /etc/prometheus/config
      - name: thanos
        mountPath: /etc/thanos
```

## Add scraping and alerting rules to monitor thanos itself

> To monitor thanos effectively, we must scrape the thanos components and define some alertmanager rules to get alerted when Thanos is not working well. Below sections outline changes in `prometheus` section of `values.yaml` to enable such scraping and alerting for Thanos components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To monitor Thanos effectively, we must scrape the Thanos components and define some Prometheus alerting rules to get notified when Thanos is not working correctly. Below sections outline changes in `prometheus` section of `values.yaml` to enable such scraping and alerting for Thanos components.
```

### Scraping config

> Add below `scraping` configuration to scrape the thanos sidecar as well as various thanos components deployed via helm chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add below `scraping` configuration to scrape the Thanos sidecar as well as various Thanos components deployed via helm chart.
```

```yaml
prometheus:
  scraping:
    configs:
    # Existing scrap configs
    - job_name: thanos-sidecar
      kubernetes_sd_configs:
      - role: pod
      relabel_configs:
      # drop node-exporters, as they need HTTPS scraping with credentials
      - source_labels: [__meta_kubernetes_namespace, __meta_kubernetes_pod_label_app_kubernetes_io_name, __meta_kubernetes_pod_label_app_kubernetes_io_instance, __meta_kubernetes_pod_container_name, __meta_kubernetes_pod_container_port_name]
        regex: '{{ .Release.Namespace }};prometheus;{{ template "name" . }};thanos;http-sidecar'
        action: keep
      # - source_labels: [__address__]
      #   action: replace
      #   regex: (.*)
      #   replacement: $1:10902
      #   target_label: __address__
      - action: labelmap
        regex: __meta_kubernetes_pod_label_(.+)
      - source_labels: [__meta_kubernetes_namespace]
        regex: (.*)
        target_label: namespace
        replacement: $1
        action: replace
      - source_labels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_name]
        regex: (.*)
        target_label: pod
        replacement: $1
        action: replace
```

### Alerting Rules

> Add Below configmap and then refer this configMap in KKP prometheus chart's `values.yaml` customization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add Below configmap and then refer this configMap in KKP Prometheus chart's `values.yaml` customization
```
